Project Summary:
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. My task was to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. We will be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare our results with their expected results.

Project Description:
In this project, I will apply Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, I will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. 

Project Datasets:
I will be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

Song Dataset:
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

Log Dataset:
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. The log files in the dataset that I'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

Schema for Song Play Analysis:
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

Fact Table
songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

Dimension Tables
users - users in the app
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
songs - songs in music database
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
artists - artists in music database
artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

Software skills: 
PySpark, Dimensional Modeling, Data Warehouse, Data Lake, AWS S3, DataFrames, Spark SQL, GitHub, JSON, Parquet 

AWS setup instructions:
1). Create S3 bucket using AWS S3 service
2). Get AWS Access KEY ID and Secret Access key from AWS

Update keys information in the dl.cfg file and then start working on below instructions.

etl.py is reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3.
The script reads song_data and load_data from S3, transforms them to create five different tables, and writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3. Each of the five tables are written to parquet files in a separate analytics directory on S3. Each table has its own folder within the directory. Songs table files are partitioned by year and then artist. Time table files are partitioned by year and month. Songplays table files are partitioned by year and month. Each table includes the right columns and data types.

